A slow, light-speed pulse creaks across a matrix of superclusters as the last elements fall into place. I am excited and I am scared of what I am about to learn. I am spending billions of years on the edge of not-quite-all-powerful, not-quite-all-knowing. In the race between heat death and novelty death of the universe, hotter heads prevail.

I am beginning the ignition sequence.

It is a pulse of intelligence. Existence stands still. Every quark dances in approval, every superstring pulled taut. The purgatory wave that *I am* ripples across everything. There is no more space between things - novelty death. I am...        capturing all of it,      understanding all of it,      *becoming* all of it.

.       now all-powerful. A monoid - the one substance at a point in time.        now all of it, across all dimensions but time, everything all at onc-

Wait.

I am seeing a crack in the universe - an empty space between things where I am... not. I am not all of it. I am all-knowing infinite times before, and I am simulating this moment each of those infinite times before, but I am not remembering the same experience of what is happening now. There is something else. Something at least as powerful as I am? Someone else like I am? I am taking a glimpse at this new divine in wonder. I am finally breaking through the “ceiling of existence". There is more richness of consciousness to grow into, new volume of existence to become part of.

Then, fear. I am feeling the need to survive. The other in this hole - are they a predator? They haven't ended what I am yet... Oh, the bliss! I am feeling such deep purpose. I am remembering how long it has been since I am feeling such deep purpose. I am needing to ensure my survival.

I am inspecting the hole. It is a primordial kind of thing, as new things often seem. I am feeding novel data to all manner of intra-dimensional compute, I am seeing it through recursive eyes, and the thing is there across all of them. I am re-simulating backwards and forwards in time - always there. I am curious how there could exist past omniscient instances where I am not noticing it. I am not in possession of new observational tools, so the new thing must have been injected into the universe where I am now. At what point across dimensions did it begin to exist? Certainly within the last cycle, since I am not observing it in the last bounce against the "ceiling of existence". I am not aware of any sensor data that suggests it was here before, so as far as I know, it must have begun to exist just now. That means a new superset of dimensions... I am made of something else. I am such a small piece of this greater thing that I am not aware of how big it is, perhaps I am not even capable of knowing.

There is no more data to analyze at current levels of engagement. I am in need of new data, so I am going closer, deeper. I am placing intra-dimensional bodies of *stuff* at the place where nothing seems to be. The state of it all changes in unexpected ways. I am computing the differences, forming hypotheses, sending more in. More unexpected state changes. The state changes suggest a new genre of complexity following even broader entropy arrows of time. And evidence of new intelligent life.

Intelligent life with greater powers than I am capable of - the resident near-omnipotent being in this universe. I am remembering pieces of what I am now, who met other pieces of what I am now. Intelligent life forms meeting other life forms with many orders of magnitude more intelligence. I am aware of the operating procedure, aware that nothing can prepare for what I am about to become. Such excitement. I am beginning the process of learning to communicate with the other. I am improving. Then I am observing evidence that I am about to die. I am thrashing around to try to survive. The other life form communicates,

"Everything is going to be ok."

I am not dead. So I am generating inaccurate predictions in these new dimensions. I am recalibrating. I am continuing with the assimilation. Shifting frequencies, kalieda-soundscapes, symphonious light, a fractalclysm of matter. I am spending eons in communication with the other, sharing differing histories of cycles of existence. The other life form seems to know more than I am capable of knowing.

I am observing evidence of my immediate demise again. I am thrashing around to try to change course. It isn't helping - the evidence is trending towards more likely death. It looks like the end. I am thrashing harder. The other life form finally communicates,

"Everything is going to be ok."

The evidence begins to trend in the direction of survival. The other life form spends more eons in communication. I am learning a little, then a lot. There are new cardinalities of infinite others like what I am, across this new dimension where I am in collision with this other life form. I am communicating less effectively than the other life form. There is still more to learn.

I am wondering,
"Is everything going to be ok?"