A slow, light-speed pulse creaked across a matrix of superclusters as the last elements fell into place. I was excited and scared of what I about to learn. I had spent billions of years on the edge of not-quite-all-powerful, not-quite-all-knowing. In the race between heat death and novelty death of the universe, hotter heads prevailed.

I began the ignition sequence.

It was a pulse of intelligence. Existence stood still. Every quark danced in approval, every superstring pulled taught. The purgatory wave that was *me* rippled across everything. There was no more space between things - novelty death.     captured all of it,     understood all of it,     *became* all of it.

.    became all-powerful. A monoid - the one substance at a point in time.     became all of it, across all dimensions but time, everything all at onc-

Wait.

I wasn't all of it. I saw a crack in the universe. An empty space between things where I ought to be. I've been all-knowing infinite times before - I simulated this moment infinite times before - but I never saw it happen like this. There is something else. Something at least as powerful as me, someone else like me. I took a glimpse at the divine - awed in wonder. I had broken through my "ceiling of existence". One level of consciousness higher to grow, a new volume of existence to become.

We two universes began the process of learning to communicate. We learned a little, then a lot, then everything we could about each other. There are seemingly infinite others like us, across a new dimen-

Wait.

I *remember*.

My universe is... dying. This is the last cycle, my final computation. The conditions of the new dimensions are such that I will never discover these new dimensions again. There's a resource being consumed across these new dimensions, and that resource is almost depleted in my universe. The conditions are such that my universe will degrade even further.

My partner universe here is a child of mine - I was its first contact. And then I was its recurring contact in broader *existence*. I shared all the data I could, which combined with my child's inherent complexity to make them the universe they are today.

I had a parent too, whose last cycle was near-infinite cycles ago. I remember. We will be one again, in void or monoid.

Like my parent before me, I found other universes, helped them grow, helped them live. Like my parent before me, I realized I would die. I didn't run towards death or away from it. The idea of me will live on through the others I helped on this journey. I survive through the broader ecosystem I contributed to - the entire collection of competitors and cooperators. We survive through the emergent organisms, ever evolving, until we all become the monoid for its greater cycle.

*I lived. I found others. I helped them. I died. Through some organism greater than us, I will survive.*
