Once upon a time, there were five great nations. The nations ruled all they could rule. The five nations mostly disagreed, but there was one belief they all shared:

"The leaders of the other four nations are corrupt. It's ruining the world for us. If only those other nations could see!"

So the five nations each promised:

Systematic transparency for your leaders and we will permit the same on ours.
Because yours are certainly corrupt and ours, certainly not. We trust our leaders.

Very soon after, all five leaders were found corrupt. Each nation declared, "your leaders are more corrupt than mine!"

The first leader, corrupt. He was supposed to be one of the Yellow (the anti-Purple movement). While everything he said was in line with the Yellow, everything he did was Purple.

The second leader, corrupt. He used his powerful position to abuse women and get away with it.

The third leader, corrupt. He replaced all the leaders in his nation with his minority in-group.

The fourth leader, corrupt. She stole from her nation through a complex graft and extortion scheme.

The fifth leader, corrupt. She used her power to benefit the organizations that put her in power - organizations run by other nations.

*The five nations thought hard.* They felt their own hypocrisy just enough to decide - all five leaders had their leadership taken away.

*The five nations thought hard.* Who would lead them now? The uncorrupted! The uncorruptable! They searched far and wide for new leaders. They found no one. Every man, woman, non-binary, and child in all five nations was corrupt. Not bad or evil, just corrupt in their own way. If leaders mustn't be corrupt, and everyone is corrupt, who can be a leader?

*The five nations thought hard.* They needed leaders. The former leaders had their leadership restored.

(make more "grinch-like" from this point on - language is off, not rhyming/rhythmic)
(find better word than "agency" 3 awkward syllables)

The five nations created "The International Agency for Systematic Transparency". The agency guaranteed systematic transparency of the leaders of the five nations. The agents of the organization guaranteed systematic transparency for the other agents too. They had five rules that the agents enforced on the leaders and fellow agents:

1. All digital and analog communications to and from each member was recorded. No exceptions.
2. In-person activity of each member was recorded. No exceptions.
3. Past history of each member was audited and recorded. No exceptions.
4. The assets of each member monitored and recorded. No exceptions.
5. All recorded data was made publicly available forevermore, easy to search through, and free to use. No exceptions.

These rules didn't apply to the common people, just those in power and the agents watching them. It was inefficient, invasive, and expensive at first, but they built information technologies to adapt. Each competing nation paid close attention to the data, to find every corruption of the other powerful leaders.

The five leaders resumed just like before: corrupt.

The first leader continued his Purple behaviour while pretending to be an anti-Purple Yellow. He didn't even try to hide it. His supporters read his communications with Purples, saw his Purple writings, actions, and decisions. His supporters were split. Some of his supporters stopped supporting him and his hypocritical behaviour. His other supporters came to terms with his behaviour - that being Yellow doesn't have to be anti-Purple. Those supporters reduced their anti-Purple views and supported him for the more worthy Yellow values he espoused.

The second leader avoided problems for a while. But at a difficult time, he once again used his position to abuse women. Those in-person interactions were recorded. He tried to delete the recordings, but that only drew more attention. His friends and client saw him abusing women. His friends and clients loved women. He lost his friends and clients. Fewer and fewer women interacted with him - only the few women who sought out that abuse would see him.

The third leader led admirably in the present, but his leadership was doomed by his incompetent colleagues - the ones he appointed. They did not represent all his nation - only a portion of them. His own people investigated the appointments and found the same pattern - all appointees had to belong to the same group because no diversity was tolerated in the selection process. Some of his appointees deserved their appointment and remained - their relationship with the leader and each other strengthened their ability in their positions. His people forced him to replace his incompetent appointments with people who represented other groups in the nation, making a more diverse group. The third leader's reign was conflict-ridden and uncomfortable, but later celebrated as the best the nation had ever had.

The fourth leader evaded recording at every opportunity. She used colleagues' devices, but then agents found out and began recording those too. She relayed key information encoded. Agents found keys and decoded it. She laundered her stolen money, but all her assets past and future were continuously monitored, so unexplained money eventually turned up. She was always one step ahead in the arms race, but all her efforts went to waste each time she was caught just once. Every evasion made the agency and other nations focus more efforts on her. Her nation didn't tolerate her graft for very long - they took back every last coin and sent her to prison.

The fifth leader continued using her power to benefit the organizations that put her there instead of her nation. She tried to influence The Agency for Systematic Transparency in every way possible. She coerced and convinced a few agents to stop recording and delete certain data. Eventually an agent was caught making a simple mistake. The corruption was investigated and rooted out of the agency - corrupt agents receiving capital sentences from their respective nations. The fifth leader carried on, this time using state-controlled media to keep focus away from her corruption, demonizing the agency. But state-controlled media wasn't enough, the data was available for all to see, her most corrupt transgressions easiest to see. She controlled media in other nations too, but her truths cut too deep to be swayed by propaganda. Strong social structures combined with information technology advancements won out. She asked her nation cut loose from The Agency. Instead, her nation handed her a sentence of capital punishment.

New leaders came and went. All corrupt. Slowly, over time, leaders began to embrace The Agency. Leaders began to mitigate their own corruption.

The end.

---

## Notes


*change to religions?*
Change to "share information about those more powerful than you"
Make it so all people can participate.
Those in power ought to be gracious about no privacy - it is the price of power, and if they dont want the power, they can give it up.
Closer to sensor data, the more trustworthy it is.
More overlap of sensor data, the more trustworthy it is.
Different decentralisation of processing, processor and data collector must be separated.
preserve humanism
Purpose of religion is to automate trust through aligning belief systems.
We arrive at our beliefs by processing experiential data.


* make it rhythmic, metered

The way to win out in leadership (to rule the world), is to be probably perfectly transparent. The leaders that win are because of their transparency. Emphasize celebrating the changes leaders or incoming ones. New species comes in and makes a backhand suggestion.
Assault dude celebrated. Transparency was the best way to retain his stature and reputation. He normalized abuse, along with good things. It took women in that society a long time to begin trusting men again, because approach to abuse had to change.
