---
layout: post
title: "Habits"
date: 'xxxx-xx-xxT00:00:00.001-05:00'
author: Douglas Hindson
tags: 
- personal development
- habit
modified_time: 'xxxx-xx-xxT00:00:00.001-05:00'
---

I can't trust myself. Small decisions I make are suboptimal. What I want now doesn't help me achieve my goals in life, but those short-term wants are so, so powerful.

>I don't want to work out and cook something healthy, I just want to watch TV and eat junk food.<br/>
>I don't want to organize a meetup, I just want to play video games.<br/>
>I don't want to meditate, I just want to scroll through Reddit and Instagram.

So I do the "bad" things sometimes. And then I do them some more. Until it gets harder to do the "good" things...

There's a disconnect between my long-term goals and short-term cravings. That is the problem. Habits are the solution - guide rails that take over in the moment. And habits are plastic! I can shape them to suit my long-term goals. Once I figure out my goals, the desired habits materialize. The "goodness", "badness", and importance of my habits are all relative to my goals.

## 80% of habits

Self-help books frame habits with four parts.

If my goal is to have beautiful teeth, a good habit is *brushing my teeth*.

* **`Trigger`**: enter bedroom before sleeping.
* **`Craving`**: want to get rid of the unclean feeling.
* **`Routine`**: brush teeth.
* **`Reward`**: polished feeling from minty toothpaste aftertaste.

If my goal is to become more mindful, a bad habit is *consuming social media*.
* **`Trigger`**: a moment of boredom when my phone is on hand.
* **`Craving`**: want to feel entertained, not bored.
* **`Routine`**: open social media app and scroll through content.
* **`Reward`**: a small burst of entertainment.

To establish a habit, I have to repeat the `trigger` > `craving` > `routine` > `reward`. Once established, habits don't go away. They're stuck in my brain - to be strengthened or weakened. I *always* want to be working on my habits, good or bad. There's never been a week where I thought, "every decision I made this week was perfect."

To strengthen or weaken a habit, I adjust in-the-moment costs and benefits - shepherding that neural net computation activated by feelings, context, and willpower inputs. Practically, I invest in shaping `routines` and don't bother with the `trigger`, `craving`, or `reward`. Maybe I'll tweak a `trigger`.

I adjust `routines` by decreasing or increasing inertia - the effort it takes to "do". I make sure the easiest, default choices are good ones.

### Examples: `routine`

<details>
<summary>A good diet (click to expand)</summary>

I make convenient food the "correct" choice. I have a list of meals that take 5-15min of preparation and have consistent calories and protein. I make sure to always have ingredients available for them. The meal list and ingredient measurements are on one page fastened to my kitchen stove. It would take a lot of upfront effort to eat an off-diet meal.
<br/><br/>
I put effort into buying food at the right time. I schedule buying food far in advance, making sure never to run out and need fast alternatives. I buy food when I have willpower - when I'm not tired or hungry. Under these conditions, I pick good food and avoid bad food. I eat the food I have, and all the food I have is good.
<br/><br/>
I invested time and effort to put myself in this position.
<br/><br/>
<a href="https://curiousest.com/diet/">Full post</a>
<br/>
</details>

<details>
<summary>Restricting media consumption</summary>

Sometimes I put extraordinary effort into sabotaging bad choices. I restrict media consumption because it doesn't bring me enough value for the time I spend on it:
<br/><br/>
I enable parental controls on my tablet and phone to blacklist websites, I change my computer's /etc/hosts file to blacklist domains, I log into my router to blacklist IPs. I get other people to hide my gaming consoles and choose the passwords I need to unlock all these things. On YouTube, I unfollow or block channels/content that I deem unproductive. On Facebook/LinkedIn/Twitter/Instagram, I unfollow friends and contacts until all newsfeed content is benign.
<br/><br/>
I still binge sometimes, taking down barriers. When I feel regret, I rebuild the walls. Then I erect stronger ones.
<br/>
</details>

<details>
<summary>My workout routine</summary>

Working out is part of my day by default. I also treat it as the time to clear my head. I have regularly scheduled meetings on my calendar every day to work out. I make the overhead on working out as low as possible. In my last two offices, my gyms were within five minutes of my desk. I also have a squat rack and weights in my bedroom as a backup.
<br/>
</details>

<details>
<summary>Less addictive gaming</summary>

I could spend all my waking hours gaming. A big problem for me is that I find it especially hard to stop without completing something. Whether it's an hour-long multiplayer game or one act of many in a single-player game, it pains me to stop part-way through. That makes gaming take far more time, with far less flexibility. As silly as it sounds, I replaced playing video games with watching others play them on platforms like Twitch and YouTube. I got half the enjoyment but I lost the need to finish. I experienced a fraction of the addiction too.
<br/><br/>
I even found watching too addictive and time-consuming, but it was an important stepping stone to my gaming abstinence.
<br/>
</details>

<details>
<summary>Higher highs or higher lows</summary>
A few months ago, I focused on maximizing peak productivity. My writing was 2x as productive for two weeks. Then I hit a low point and I didn't write at all for a three-month stretch. What's better, 2x-ing peak productivity or 0.5x-ing when times get tough?

<br/>
</details>


### Examples: `trigger`

<details>
<summary>Peer pressure</summary>

I have a friend who always tempts me with indulgent food. I shared my diet goals with them and the importance of these goals to me. I explained that I don't always have the willpower to resist, but resisting is always the right choice. I asked them to help me achieve my goals and not actively work against them.
<br/>
</details>

<details>
<summary>Restricting media consumption</summary>

I got into a bad habit of watching TV or scrolling through social media while eating. A very hard habit to break and a huge timesink. I tried mindful eating, with no distractions, but that never stuck. I bought print subscriptions to The Economist and Harvard Business Review. I leave the magazines where I eat. Now I consume a less addictive, less time-consuming media source while I eat.
<br/>
</details>

<details>
<summary>Habit tracking</summary>

I leave my habit/gratitude/goal-tracking book on my kitchen table where I eat in the morning and at night. I record after I eat. I used to have it beside my bed, but I often forgot. 
<br/>
</details>

### Deeper resources

<details>
<summary>Atomic habits</summary>

<a href="https://www.samuelthomasdavies.com/book-summaries/self-help/atomic-habits/">Book summary.</a> This was my favourite book on habits. It closely aligned with my beliefs and motivations.
<br/><br/>

<b>Choice quotes</b>
<br/><br/>
“You do not rise to the level of your goals. You fall to the level of your systems.” 
<br/><br/>

“One of the best ways to build a new habit is to identify a current habit you already do each day and then stack your new behavior on top. This is called habit stacking.”
<br/><br/>

“People with high self-control tend to spend less time in tempting situations. It’s easier to avoid temptation than resist it.”
<br/><br/>

“Habits are easier when they align with your natural abilities. Choose the habits that best suit you.”
<br/><br/>

“One of the most effective things you can do to build better habits is to join a culture where (1) your desired behavior is the normal behavior and (2) you already have something in common with the group.”
<br/><br/>

</details>

<details>
<summary>Tiny habits / Mini Habits</summary>

<a href="https://www.samuelthomasdavies.com/book-summaries/self-help/tiny-habits/">Tiny Habits book summary.</a> <a href="https://www.samuelthomasdavies.com/book-summaries/self-help/mini-habits/">Mini habits book summary.</a> These books are similar. Their advice didn't suit me (explored in the second half of this article).
<br/><br/>

<b>Choice quotes</b>
<br/><br/>

The essence of Tiny Habits is to take a behavior you want, make it tiny, find where it fits naturally in your life, and nurture its growth.
<br/><br/>

"The foundation of the Mini Habits system is in ‘stupid small’ steps."
<br/><br/>

"You can disrupt a behavior you don’t want by removing the prompt. This isn’t always easy, but removing the prompt is your best first move to stop a behavior from happening."
<br/><br/>

“We’re quick to blame ourselves for lack of progress, but slow to blame our strategies."
<br/>
</details>

<details>

<summary>7 Habits of Highly Effective People</summary>

<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_7_Habits_of_Highly_Effective_People">Wikipedia summary.</a> <a href="https://www.samuelthomasdavies.com/book-summaries/self-help/mini-habits/">Book summary.</a> Half the ideas in this book seem passé - like they're already ingrained into modern corporate culture. It has a 90s feel, packed with clichés (one of the habits is "Synergize"). It originated many of them.
<br/><br/>

<b>Choice quotes</b>
<br/><br/>

"Management is doing things right; leadership is doing the right things"
<br/><br/>

"If I really want to improve my situation, I can work on the one thing over which I have control - myself."
<br/><br/>

"Sow a thought, reap an action; sow an action, reap a habit; sow a habit, reap a character; sow a character, reap a destiny."
<br/><br/>

"The key is not to prioritize what’s on your schedule, but to schedule your priorities."
<br/>
</details>

<br/>

## Committing my identity

> *Three ways to change your habits:*
> 
> - *Option A:  Have an epiphany*
> - *Option B:  Change your environment*
> - *Option C:  Take baby steps*
> 
>*Creating an epiphany is difficult. So rule out Option A unless you have magical powers...*
>
>*-Tiny Habits by BJ Fogg*

<br/>

I disagree. The habits I care about started big and the first step was never a baby one. It was a change like,<br/>"Starting from today, my life is different. I'm *a weightlifter*."

Here is how I commit my identity:

>I see a lifestyle and I want it.
>
>If I covet the rewards, it will inspire me.
>
>If I find inspiration, I will research it.
>
>If I see an opportunity, I will try it.
>
>If I fail, I will know what to change.
>
>If I iterate, it will grow into part of me.
>
>If I identify with the habit, I will evangelize it.
>
>This is my life now. I am an ___.

I research possibilities and empathize with people who have shared their experiences. I brainstorm changes to how I live and visualize results. It's a passive mental activity - background processing for days or weeks. I may block out an hour to contemplate. I think about it when I walk, shower, daydream...

At some point, it clicks. I know how to start. I choose the right time to begin - when I have high willpower and my life has few unknowns - then I commit to it. I try it, find out what doesn't work, fix that. Try again. Iterate. Persevere.

Week after week I put time and effort into this habit, so it's on my mind. It creeps into conversation. I test the waters, a discussion flows into a debate with a friend who will suffer me. The debate brings me back to this planet, teaches me how others think about the costs and rewards of the habit. I take the side I'm invested in. And by now I'm oh-so invested - I've committed time, money, and social capital.

A few debates later, somewhere along my [escalation of commitment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Escalation_of_commitment), I begin to identify with the habit. I truly identify with the habit when I evangelize it. With the experience I've gathered debating the habit, I can make it sound appealing. I can't help but evangelize.

### Examples

<details>
<summary>A good diet</summary>

"A diet habit will make me look better, feel better, look better, spend less time on food, look better..."
<br/><br/>
I contemplated the possibilities and implications until I found a path to commitment. I saw a dietician, followed their advice, and kept what worked. My diet became part of my identity. I am someone who has a strict diet. When someone talks about food, my perspective is, "as someone on a more strict diet."
<br/><br/>
Why doesn't everyone eat "correctly"? They probably don't have the awareness or tools, just like pre-diet me.
<br/>
</details>

<details>
<summary>Video game abstinence</summary>

"Not consuming video games will give me more productivity, more time for the things I wish I did more."
<br/><br/>
I thought and thought until I found the path to commitment (or in this case, wall of commitment). Each time I over-indulged, I put barriers in front of the platform I binged on. I deleted games, hid devices, threw away passwords. I became a former gamer. Gaming is part of my identity and so is its abstinence. If someone talks about games, I get excited. When the conversation drifts to present gaming, I apologize for not being up-to-date but empathize with the passion. I'm a former gamer.
<br/><br/>
Although I enjoyed video games, they weren't bringing me long-term rewards. Are they the best time investment? What goals are they helping you achieve? Surely you can find a form of entertainment that makes you better every day...
<br/>
</details>

## Conclusion

I reflected on the habits that stuck, then I read books on habits. The successful habits are part of my identity, where default choices are good ones. I never wished for the habits themselves, so I never wished for any new identity. I had goals and habits were the way to achieve them. Committing my identity got me there.