---
layout: post
title: "How I grow habits"
date: 'xxxx-xx-xxT00:00:00.001-05:00'
author: Douglas Hindson
tags: 
- personal development
- habit
modified_time: 'xxxx-xx-xxT00:00:00.001-05:00'
---

Layout:

intro

1. The basics of habit
Summary e2e
Links for more info
- summary article
- actual book

"This is the 80%, everything else is the 20%"

2. Committing identity
"This not as fleshed out in those books"

3. Playing with inertia
"This is not as fleshed out in those books"

## Tiny habits
Option A:  Have an epiphany
Option B:  Change your environment
Option C:  Take baby steps

Creating an epiphany is difficult. So rule out Option A unless you have magical powers—I don’t.  

A trigger, or cue. (anchor)
A routine. (behavior - motivation + ability + prompt)
A reward (celebration)

On the other hand, Option B and Option C are practical. And they can lead to lasting change if you follow the right program.

debugging this habit:

Change the trigger — maybe ‘right before I go to sleep, while on bed’ is a bad time to slot in a new habit.
Simplify the action — ‘take up my kindle’ is the smallest version of this action already, so there’s not much to do here.
Celebrate when I’ve picked up the kindle but not read anything — this is acceptance that I can’t do it every night; but creates a reward in order to keep the habit loop going

“We’re quick to blame ourselves for lack of progress, but slow to blame our strategies”.

Step 1: Choose Your Mini Habits & Habit Plan
Step 2: Use The Why Drill On Each Mini Habit
Step 3: Define Your Habit Cues
Step 4: Create Your Reward Plan
Step 5: Write Everything Down
Step 6: Think Small
Step 7: Meet Your Schedule & Drop High Expectations
Step 8: Watch For Signs Of Habit, But Be Careful Not to Jump the Gun

Never, Ever Cheat
Be Happy With All Progress
Reward Yourself Often, Especially After a Mini Habit
Stay Level-headed
If You Feel Strong Resistance, Back Off & Go Smaller
Remind Yourself How Easy This Is
Never Think A Step Is Too Small
Put Extra Energy and Ambition Toward Bonus Reps, Not A Bigger Requirement

Image summary http://masterfacilitator.com/tiny-habits-sketchnote-book-summary/

## Atomic habits

The Four Laws of Behavior Change are a simple set of rules we can use to build better habits. They are (1) make it obvious, (2) make it attractive, (3) make it easy, and (4) make it satisfying

There are three layers of behavior change: a change in your outcomes, a change in your processes, or a change in your identity. 

“Any habit can be broken down into a feedback loop that involves four steps: cue, craving, response, and reward.”

“One of the best ways to build a new habit is to identify a current habit you already do each day and then stack your new behavior on top. This is called habit stacking.”

“Gradually, your habits become associated not with a single trigger but with the entire context surrounding the behavior. The context becomes the cue.”

“It is easier to build new habits in a new environment because you are not fighting against old cues.”

“People with high self-control tend to spend less time in tempting situations. It’s easier to avoid temptation than resist it.”

“It is the anticipation of a reward—not the fulfillment of it—that gets us to take action. The greater the anticipation, the greater the dopamine spike.”

“One of the most effective things you can do to build better habits is to join a culture where (1) your desired behavior is the normal behavior and (2) you already have something in common with the group.”

“Reduce the friction associated with good behaviors. When friction is low, habits are easy.”

“Increase the friction associated with bad behaviors. When friction is high, habits are difficult.”

Habit tracking, accountability partner, align habits with natural ability.

---

Trigger for improving a habit is regret from the habit failing.

- Make article about inducing inspiration and meta-habits (habits for creating habits)
- Don't be so pretentious

---

I commit so hard, people say I'm a robot. It's strange that they don't say I'm a fanatic. I guess it's because what I do is usually theoretically correct, but practically unreasonable.

I'm good at growing habits. I have a lifetime of practice, mostly failing. I reflected on the habits that stuck, then I read books on habits. The successful habits are part of my identity. I never wanted them - I had goals and habits were the way to achieve them. They constrain my decisions, guiderails for my day-to-day life, and I've invested a lot in growing them. I'm now so attached to these habits that maintaining them becomes a renegade goal.


## 80% of habits

A habit is a routine I do over and over. A good habit helps me achieve my goals and a bad one gets in the way. I need to work on my habits because I can't trust myself. My short-term and long-term interests don't align - feelings and environment are way too influential. Habits solve this disconnect. They take over in the moment and I can shape them to suit my long-term goals. Once I figure out my goals, desired habits fall out. The "goodness", "badness", and importance of my habits are all relative to my goals.

A habit has a trigger, a craving, a routine, and a reward.

Ex: brushing teeth.
Trigger: go into bathroom before sleeping
Craving: I need to brush my teeth to keep them healthy.
Routine: brush teeth.
Reward: clean feeling from minty toothpaste aftertaste.

My goal is to have really nice and healthy teeth, so I want to strengthen this habit.

Ex: using social media.
Trigger: moment of boredom when phone is on hand.
Craving: I want to feel entertained, not bored.
Routine: open social media app, then scroll through content.
Reward: small burst of entertainment.

My goal is to consume less useless media, so I want to weaken this habit.

To establish a habit, I have to repeatedly experience the trigger -> craving -> routine -> reward. Once established, habits don't really go away. They're stuck in my brain. I don't eliminate bad habits - I weaken them.

I want to strengthen my good habits and weaken my bad habits. Moreover, I've found I *always* want to be working on my habits. There's never been a week where I thought, "Every decision I made this week was perfect, so I don't need to improve anymore." It's hard work for me to change my habits, but it's been worth the time and effort.

To strengthen or weaken a habit, I change how easy and attractive it is. I change the in-the-moment costs and benefits, influencing that untrustworthy calculation based on feelings, context, and willpower.

### Easy

Trigger more obvious for good habit, less obvious for bad habit. ex:
- alarm
- delete bad stuff from your phone home screen

“It is easier to build new habits in a new environment because you are not fighting against old cues.”
- Atomic habits

“One of the best ways to build a new habit is to identify a current habit you already do each day and then stack your new behavior on top. This is called habit stacking.”

Doing good habit is easy, doing bad habit harder:
- put up barriers on bad thing
- take down barriers on good thing

Start extremely small and build up. Pick habits that align with ability.

“Reduce the friction associated with good behaviors. When friction is low, habits are easy.”

“Increase the friction associated with bad behaviors. When friction is high, habits are difficult.”


### Attractive 

Doing the habit is attractive ex:
- anticipating eating a good thing
- if I don't do it, I have to pay someone $100


“It is the anticipation of a reward—not the fulfillment of it—that gets us to take action. The greater the anticipation, the greater the dopamine spike.”

- add a nice reward to finishing it
- habit tracking



“One of the most effective things you can do to build better habits is to join a culture where (1) your desired behavior is the normal behavior and (2) you already have something in common with the group.”

## 20% not covered elsewhere

### Committing my identity

>If I covet the pay-off, it will inspire me.
>
>If I find inspiration, I will research it.
>
>If I figure out an approach, I will try it.
>
>If I fail, I will know what to change.
>
>If I iterate, it will become part of me.
>
>If I identify with the habit, I will evangelize it.
>
>This is my life now. I am an __.

Goal -> need habit.

I brainstorm as many situations as I can and visualize results. I research possibilities and empathize with people who shared their experience. It's a passive mental activity - background processing for days to weeks. I think about it when I walk, shower, daydream...

> Three ways to change your habits:
> 
> - Option A:  Have an epiphany
> - Option B:  Change your environment
> - Option C:  Take baby steps
> 
>Creating an epiphany is difficult. So rule out Option A unless you have magical powers...
>
>*-Tiny Habits by BJ Fogg*

At some point it clicks. I know how to start. I choose the right time to begin - when I have high willpower and my life has few unknowns - then I commit to it. I try it, find out what doesn't work, fix that. Try again. Iterate. Persevere.

I'm putting time and effort into this habit, so it's on my mind. It creeps into conversation. Debating teaches me how people think about the costs and rewards of the habit. I naturally take the side I'm invested in. And by now I'm *really* invested - I've committed time, effort, money, and social capital. Somewhere along the [escalation of commitment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Escalation_of_commitment), I start to identify with the habit. I truly identify with the habit when I evangelize it. I've gathered experience debating the habit. Once I can predict how someone will react to the costs and rewards, I can frame the habit in the most appealing way. I can't help myself from evangelizing.

#### Example: [a good diet](/diet)

A diet habit will make me look better, feel better, look better, spend less time on food, look better... I contemplated the possibilities and implications until I found a path to commitment. I saw a dietician, followed their advice, and kept what worked. My diet became part of my identity. I am someone who has a strict diet. When someone talks about food, my perspective is, "as someone on a strict diet." When social events center around food, I need special consideration.

Why doesn't everyone eat correctly? They probably don't have the awareness. I share.

#### Example: video games abstinence

Not consuming video games will give me more productivity, more time for the things I wish I did more. I contemplated the possibilities and implications until I found a path to commitment. Each time I over-indulged, I put barriers in front of the platform I binged on. I became a former gamer. Gaming is part of my identity and so is its abstinence. If someone talks about games, I get excited. When the conversation drifts to present gaming, I apologize for not being up-to-date, but empathize with the passion. I'm a former gamer.

Although I enjoyed video games, they weren't bringing me long-term rewards. Are they the best time investment? Thought planted.

### Playing with inertia


Making time for the habit is halfway there - I can still waste time. I'm human. I have low-willpower moments when I make poor short-term decisions. I need the default choices to be good ones. If I make time for the habit and the most convenient choices are good ones, the habit is going to work.

It takes effort to make the default choices good. I have to put upfront effort into making good choices more convenient. I also put upfront effort into making the bad choices inconvenient. Sometimes I even put *more* effort into sabotaging bad choices.

#### Example: [a good diet](/diet)

I put effort into buying food at the right time. I schedule buying food far in advance, making sure never to run out and need fast alternatives. I buy food when I have willpower - when I'm not tired or hungry. Under these conditions, I pick good food and avoid bad food. I eat the food I have, and the food I have is all good.

=> investing in good upstream decisions

#### Example: restricting media consumption

I bookmark and mentally whitelist "good options". I make bad options as inconvenient as possible: I enable parental controls on my tablet and phone to blacklist websites, I change my computer's /etc/hosts file to blacklist domains, I log into my router to blacklist IPs. I get other people to hide my gaming consoles. 

On Youtube I unfollow or block channels/content that I deem unproductive. On Facebook/LinkedIn/Twitter/Instagram, I unfollow friends and contacts until all newsfeed content is benign.

I still binge sometimes, taking down barriers. If I feel regret, I rebuild the walls, then erect more.

=> investing in red tape

### Debugging

I used to think meditation was a tool to train willpower. I used to say things like, "Willpower is a tank that empties. I meditate to make the tank bigger." People who meditate seem to do all the things they really ought to do. They don't do the things they shouldn't. They seem to have more willpower. Correlation.

Now I think it improves my powers of self-observation. When I know what's really going on inside, I can debug my habits.

> People with high self-control tend to spend less time in tempting situations. It’s easier to avoid temptation than resist it.
> *- Atomic habits*

My habits falter all the time - I haven't meditated in a month! I start from my goals. What goal am I trying to achieve with this habit? Is this goal really a priority right now? Am I overreaching? If I want to fix this failing habit, I introspect for a while and think about what to change (easy/attractive). If the habit is important and likely to fail, I track it by checking it off every day. 

---

- the long-term return is high and inspiring
- so that I can think, "this is my life now"
- so that I make time for it
- the default choices for the habit are good, so that when my willpower is low, I still make the correct decisions


If I can design the lifestyle change and the default choices for that habit are good ones, it will succeed.

The key considerations for the diet were:
- eat at the same time every day
- eat the same # of calories every day
- every meal comes from a list (1/10 days I eat a meal that doesn't come from the list)
-> groceries are repeatable (easy to re-order online or be in grocery store. You look at what's running low and get more. You don't eat anything else, so there's little temptation or opportunity for weakness.)
- say "no" to people trying to make you eat other things
- don't drink calories (alcohol, soft drinks, etc)

Everything I consume (except for that one meal every ten days or so) is from a preapproved list, so my defaults are perfect. I have minimal decision-making overhead about food - the hardest decision I have to make is, "which of these two meals will I eat right now?". The meals are the easiest options available to me - it would be more time and energy-consuming to order delivery food, find unhealthy food, or go out to eat. It's so much easier to stay on course when the most convenient option is by far the best.

Correct defaults:

Low time and decision making overhead
low activation energy
What happens when the easiest option is the best option? Fireworks. Unicorn.

## Managing willpower

asdf

### Example: a good diet


### Example: 