---
layout: post
title: "Your boss is better than you"
date: '2020-09-27T00:00:00.001-05:00'
author: Douglas Hindson
tags: 
- essay
- information
modified_time: '2020-09-27T00:00:00.001-05:00'
---

I work in an industry where people *want* to share information. Technical managers treat knowledge silos as a risk. Product managers are information gatherers and disseminators. Still, there is information asymmetry in the workplace. Here are five little stories from my experience.

## My boss, developing superpowers

*** better story about unreasonable expectations of him / cult-like behaviour

I worked at a tech startup from the early stages, and my boss held an executive title. As the company grew in headcount, he grew too. I watched as my boss, as far as I could tell, became exponentially _better_. 

Developers drafted memes celebrating his prowess. Homebrew cult of personality. He humbly dismissed them.

Nontechnical staff fawned over his words. His assertions became commandments, every decision deemed the correct one.

He is a truly great person, but I felt his realized powers were disproportionately great. There were many smart and sociable people at the company, but we celebrated him. The rapid increase in ability didn't make sense to me...

## My undue power

*** actual story - dialog w/ other developer about 10x productivity or mtg with larger group

As time passed and the developer team grew, I accrued seniority: interviewing and onboarding our product team's new joiners, providing technical input to business and product decisions, shipping mission-critical features... Whatever question my colleagues had about our system or technology, I could answer off the top of my head. In group contexts, my technical opinions carried unchallengeable weight, and confidently saying *anything* grew my perceived competence and social capital.

I knew my skill and intelligence were not 10x others, but my output per unit of effort was. I realized that the productivity discrepancy between me and other developers was coming from my accumulated company-specific knowledge.

In retrospect, I made [so many poor technical decisions with such big consequences](https://charity.wtf/2020/11/01/questionable-advice-the-trap-of-the-premature-senior). My failures didn't affect my power.

## My boss' boss, solving a hard problem

I once worked as a tech lead where my product was facing a conundrum. We had been using a half-way working solution to a hard problem for a year. Almost half the time, our solution didn't work, and errors had a high cost - our customers' trust. For months, our team pondered how to make a step-change improvement. But all the options seemed to be big technical investments that we couldn't afford to make. My boss' boss, the CTO, was familiar with the problem but not the current solution. He asked for the codebase and a brief overview. He reviewed it over the weekend and came back with the solution.

**Boss' boss**: "I looked at the code. It's a bit strange and we could make some minor improvements, but there's nothing there we can do to solve our problem."

**Me**: "Yup."

**Boss' boss**: "We can solve the problem a different way, though. The non-tech team XYZ can do it."

**Me**: "Wouldn't that be a huge, continuous manual effort for them?"

**Boss' boss**: "Yes, but it's better than any alternative. I talked to XYZ team manager, and they're on board."

This didn't even register as a possibility to me - to give this whole problem to an unrelated non-technical team in a way that would take an order of magnitude more effort. I didn't know the inner workings or priorities of the other team. I didn't even know that the other team had the skills to solve this problem. With the knowledge I had, I could not see that solution space.

My skip-level boss' ideas were better than mine and there was no way to change that.

## Successive developers with undue power

I once held a product management role. Throughout my involvement, four successive developers found themselves in the position of having the deepest understanding of the technical system comprising the product. I noticed a story arc:

Freshly introduced to the system, the developer struggles. There is little documentation, and Douglas' introductory system overview only hints at the complexity and technical debt. A peer, the other developer of the system, seems to be 10x as productive. The peer barely helps to onboard; they're a silo of knowledge. Suddenly an organizational shift happens and the peer is no longer. The developer is the only realistic individual to take up the mantle of "the developer with the deepest understanding", granted independent of ability. They have the greatest influence over the velocity of product improvements. No one debates the decisions they make. They are perceived as high performers.

They had *real organizational power*, situationally imposed.

## God-mode founder

I was talking with a data scientist on another product. He had just been in their product steering meeting. The business-oriented founder had joined for the first time. My colleague described in amazement,

**Colleague**: "It was incredible! He showed up and just, *ran the meeting*. He grilled us on deep details. Went into so much detail in everything - product, research, business, operations. How can he be that good!?"

**Me**: "Yes, he's similar in our product steering meetings. I think a big part of it is he has *all the information*. He knows the involvement and ability of every person in the company. He knows what customers care about and how their end-users interact with the product. He understands engineering limitations, how the research team performs experiments, and what experts are doing when they perform an expert task. He knows *everything*."

**Colleague**: "Yeah that makes sense."

*Contemplative pause...*

**Colleague**: "He's still exceptional."

**Me**: "Agreed."

## Conclusion

[In an interview](https://www.ted.com/talks/reed_hastings_how_netflix_changed_entertainment_and_where_it_s_headed?language=en), Netflix's CEO Reed Hastings, said, "I pride myself on making as few decisions as possible in a quarter."

Workers "on the ground" have context that higher-ups don't, and vice-versa. Where should decision-making happen? Certainly by those that have the context and availability. There's a spectrum of options, from empowering management to empowering workers. High-tech companies are complex to the point that they're more effective when they empower workers.

When someone in your organization seems more capable or intelligent, have a think. How much of it is:

* Accumulated org-specific knowledge?
* Access to the latest information?
* Actual ability and experience?

When someone in your organization seems less capable or intelligent, consider: if they had your org-specific information and access, how much better could they be?
