## Intro

Consume with caution! These words are made of highly addictive substance. You can burn them or save them to sell when I’m dead and famous.

Oct 31 2023 - ???

I thought about her every day until yesterday. Someday I won’t think about her for two.

I started this project with the intention of sending it once I stopped thinking about you for a day. The implications of this project changed wildly over the months since I left London.
## Vienna (February)

You left scars. But they’re pretty scars, I’m fond of them.

The feeling I have for her now is one I could have for others. Intense infatuation. Desire and yearning, but not romantic love. I want to convert it to love. And I can only have love when we both consent and commit to letting it happen. An agreement our brains&bodies make with one-another. But I'm gone, so I can't have expectations.

She is a paragon of virtue, and so I would trust her to decide any part of my life.

## Hungary (March)

I could shape my foundational beliefs into believing in her. Having faith in her. That she is all-important. It would mean extreme pain if/when I lose her, but I know it can’t be worse than the pain I felt when I lost meaning. I’m comfortable with that faith. I’m willing to make myself vulnerable to that loss. I've read too much Kierkegaard.

One of the reasons I'm growing a beard is that it’s proven to make men seem like more appropriate fathers.

## Berlin (April)

I tried too hard to get your people to like me. I tried too hard to give you freedom. It was imbalanced and came from a place of weakness. Your social grace and free-exploring nature are the most attractive things about you. I’m already an explorer, but I wanted to match you. I tried too hard, and for that I got “love” and abuse, my defence mechanisms triggered yours, reinforcing what I hate most about myself. Each time you said you loved me, I flinched. I’m comfortable being loved but I didn’t believe what you said. It came without any other comparable displays of affection. It didn’t sound like you believed yourself either. It sounded like you were casting a spell on the world, like you *wanted* to love and maybe the incantation would make it happen. I can’t think of a thing you could have done to lose my commitment, and I can’t think of a thing I could have done to get yours. That wasn’t commitment, it wasn’t love. I hope you get over your shadows and find a way to vulnerability and trust.

The night we went to Verbali had the happiest moments of my life in memory. The following night was the greatest emotional pain I’ve felt, in memory. And although such ups and downs are not a way to live, I would suffer the months of pain again for another few hours of that night.

## Aachen (May)

I have lots of words. Words are promises like currency is promises - worthless without trust. I don’t believe in repentance or forgiveness. Words won’t solve my problems, they're theory and therapy. I’m going to do what I've been saying I’m going to do, ever since 2022. I’m going to work on myself, finish this book, then find work, build my tribe, find a partner, and build more life.

Once I went to a party with a girl and she got so intoxicated that she wasn’t able to walk up stairs on her own. It was the third time it had happened and I wasn’t ok with it. I ended our relationship that night. The next week, she said

  

“I just wanted to say that some of the things you said to me the other day have really really hurt me. That you don't feel attracted to me anymore because I am too intoxicated all the time. I had not been clubbing for 6 weeks now and I have been dieting hard and going to the gym for you…”

  

I understood what she said, but I didn’t understand what she was really saying until now.
## Toronto

If someone I care about so deeply would end a relationship over the thing I’m most self-conscious about, then I must find a solution to that thing.

## Waterloo

I wish I had met her a year later, with a stable foundation and a year of self-work. I don’t regret being vulnerable and getting hurt. I will do it again and again until something sticks, then I’ll keep doing it more. At least I now know the shape of the kind of person I want to build a future with.

## Ottawa