---
layout: post
title: Planet 731
date: 2024-07-15T00:00:00.001-05:00
author: Douglas Hindson
tags:
  - story
modified_time: 2024-07-15T00:00:00.001-05:00
---
An unknown presence arrived at earth. To every human, it said,
“Half of humankind must commit suicide, otherwise you will die until half remain.”

Everywhere, humans began to die, first by the unknown presence, then humans killed humans by war, ethnic cleansing, and suicide, then more by the unknown presence, then more by human hands, which was followed by one last wave of death from the unknown presence.

Half of humankind remained to hear the unknown presence say,
“Every human must kill exactly one other human. The rest will die.”

Some people killed others right away, while others ran away. Clever inventions were devised to allow a pair to have a 50% chance to kill and a 50% chance to die. Those who had killed took a trophy from the corpse to adorn themselves in their proof that they were no longer hunting, while those who hadn’t killed tried their best to blend in. The unknown presence eventually brought a concluding wave of death.

There were those who had killed too many and those who failed to kill, so twenty percent of humankind remained to hear the unknown presence say,
“Every human must find an interesting way to die. Those who do not will be tortured to death.”

Many people killed themselves and many others died together. Some took joy in hunting others and some others took no part in killing. All who remained were tortured to death. Earth was quiet for a moment, then all of humankind was brought back to life and tortured to death again.

---

This is a horrible, horrible story inspired by reading Ken Liu's short story on the Japanese medical experimentation facility Unit 731 during WW2.